through the eyes of this
special family we're going to learn more
about the owl's mysterious world
lloyd and rose are going to put their
own birds to the test
and this year they're expecting some new
arrivals
two barn owl chicks
the first of them is ready to hatch
come on little one
one more big push and you're out
[Music]
hello you've done well little one eh
that must been a huge effort let's get
out of there
see it's easy to take it for granted
when you're here but actually it's
it's a really wondrous thing to see new
life to come into the world
there's something really special about
that really special
mind you saying that they're not the
prettiest of outlets are they
this chick and her younger sibling have
come from a pair of captive barn owls
[Music]
as they grow they'll give us a rare and
incredible opportunity
to learn more about these secretive
birds
we've already thought of her name or
she's luna
we always tend to give her birds names
because they become part of the family
[Music]
with lloyd's love and care luna grows
quickly
[Music]
and just six days later she meets her
younger sister
lloyd and rose call her lily
during these early days and weeks lloyd
and rose need to give luna and lily
round-the-clock attention
delicious when they hatch they're blind
completely helpless
they can't even regulate their own body
temperature and they need four feeds a
day
it's just like babies really yes but
you've taken on a responsibility so you
just have to get up with it
[Music]
the outlets have a long way to go before
they transform
into magnificent super powered owls
how should we write down that youtube
today
nature will play its part but right now
they're entirely dependent on lloyd and
[Music]
rose
we think of barn owls as birds of dusk
and night
haunters of the dark creatures of the
moon
so to see them hunting by day out here
along the essex sea wall
startles me
in daylight they resemble apparitions
the closest thing to ghosts in the bird
world
flying with a supernatural vigilance
[Music]
to me they set the land over which they
move a light
with wildness
[Music]
they pass through the air these birds
with the silence of falling snow
cold weather and a blanket of snow have
left her short of food
so she's been forced to hunt in the day
and now she's got competition
a kestrel
[Music]
it's one of the downsides of hunting
during the daylight hours
[Music]
and even worse the snow means she can't
see her prey
so how do you find your food when it's
hiding out of sight
[Music]
hunger forces the kestrel to take a
chance
but his razor sharp eyesight isn't
enough in these conditions
luckily for the bar now she has another
superpower in her
[Music]
armory
flying blind won't stop her eating
[Music]
because although she can't see it she
can hear her prey
even under the snow
[Music]
the kestrel simply doesn't have what it
takes
so how does an owl's extraordinary
hearing work
some owls have ear tufts but these
feathers aren't used for hearing
[Music]
they're more about communicating mood
in fact the owl's whole head is designed
for listening
its distinctive round face is shaped
like a satellite dish
specifically to detect sound
a ring of stiff feathers channel the
sound towards the true ears
which are hidden at the side of the face
some species of owl have one ear opening
higher than the other
this unique adaptation allows the owl to
work out what height a sound is coming
from
as well as the directions sound arriving
at the left ear before it reaches the
right
tells the owl it's coming from below
[Music]
at certain frequencies an hour's hearing
is 10 times more sensitive than ours
[Music]
this extraordinary skill means this
great grey owl
can locate its prey
[Music]
even when it's out of sight
oh she's
and now shh it's kenza's turn
no nothing at all absolutely quiet
it's amazing but what if the microphones
picked up
[Music]
the decibel waveforms show the sound
being generated by the birds in flight
each spike is an individual wing beat
[Music]
but with the bar now
there's almost nothing
yeah even our array of super sensitive
microphones
failed to pick up any sound of kenza in
flight and here's the owl doing exactly
the same
nothing nothing at all i'll play it
again
there's not a sound here that is really
impressive isn't it
it shows that they really are silent
flyers
so how does a barn owl fly so silently
[Music]
when air moves it generates sound
the more movement the greater the sound
the pigeon's large body and small wings
mean it can't stay airborne without a
lot of fast flapping
this creates turbulence in the feathers
below
[Music]
the peregrine has much larger wings
which it uses to build up speed
and chase down its prey
[Music]
so
the barn owl is far more graceful
[Music]
kenza's large wings and small body make
it easier for her to generate lift
so just one gentle wing beat sees her
gliding effortlessly through the air
creating little more than a whisper in
the feathers below
wherever they live all owls have an
amazing aerial agility
they're even able to take off vertically
from standing
it's a great defensive move especially
when you've got young to protect
a dive bombing arctic skewer is no match
for the snowy owl
such mastery of the skies seems to make
these owls fearless
even against one of the arctic's largest
predators
[Music]
so
the supreme flying skills drive the
wolves away
and her family is safe
[Music]
you